Welcome back to the course, it's time to practice.
In this lecture we will solve this Leetcode
problem named: Find all possible recipes from
given supplies. We have a list of n recipes.
We also have the ingredients of each of these
recipes in a 2D array ingredients where ingredients[i]
is the array of ingredients of recipes[i].
And we have a list supplies that represents
ingredients we initially have, in infinite
quantity. The goal is to find out what possible
recipes we can prepare and return that list
in any order. Note that recipes can be ingredients
to each other. Here is an example, we have
three recipes: chicken burger, buns, and crispy
chicken. Chicken burger requires buns, crispy
chicken, lettuce, and cheese to be prepared.
Buns require yeast and flour. And crispy chicken
requires chicken and breadcrumbs. And as initial
supplies, we have yeast, flour, cheese, breadcrumbs,
milk, and lettuce. As output, we get the three
recipes, we can prepare them all. We start
by preparing the buns, we add them to supplies
because we can use them later. Yes you have
a portal that can prepare everything. Then
we prepare the crispy chicken, we also add
them to supplies, then we use what we made
to make chickenburger. How to solve this problem?
This problem would have been really easy if
recipes couldn't be ingredients of other recipes,
because we would just need to traverse recipes,
to search for ones whose ingredients are a
subset of supplies. In other words, for each
recipe, if all its ingredients are available,
then we can prepare it. And the traversal
order wouldn't matter, because we have infinite
quantity of supplies. However, in this problem,
recipes can be ingredients to each other.
What does it mean? It means that we may need
to prepare some recipes before moving to other
ones, for example if we have two recipes A
and B and A is an ingredient of B, we'd start
by A, we prepare it, we add it to supplies,
then we'd move to B, to have A available in
our supplies. We deduce that the order we
use to traverse recipes matters here. In our
initial example, let's try to traverse recipes
this way. Buns, we can prepare them, we add
them to our output and to our supplies. Then
chickenburger, crispy chicken is missing,
we cannot prepare it. Then crispy chicken,
we can prepare it, we add it to our output
and to our supplies. We got 2 prepared recipes,
but what if we used this order. Buns, we can
prepare them, we have yeast and flour. Then
crispy chicken, we can prepare it, we have
chicken and breadcrumbs. Then chicken burger,
we can prepare it, we have buns, crispy chicken,
lettuce, and cheese. We've been able to prepare
3 recipes now, by just changing the order.
In this order, buns and crispy chicken, which
are ingredients of chickenburger, came before
it, it's the right thing to do because we
first need to prepare them before being able
to prepare chickenburger, it's like buns and
crispy chicken are prerequisites for chicken
burger. In general, if A and B are recipes
and A is an ingredient of B, then A must come
before B in the ordering. Prerequisites, must
come before, ordering, we're obviously talking
about topological sort, we want a topological
sort of recipes to know how to traverse them.
But as input, we don't have a graph, we just
have the list of recipes, ingredients, and
supplies. This is why we first need to build
the graph, then use topological_sort on it.
We will have a graph where vertices are recipes,
and an edge from u to v means that u is in
ingredients of v so it must come before it.
To build this graph, we start by creating
a vertex of each recipe, then for each couple
of recipes (u,v), if u is in ingredients[v],
we add an edge from u to v. After building
it, we just call topological_sort on it, and
we get the ordering we're searching for. Then
starting from here, we can apply the strategy
we talked about at the beginning, we traverse
recipes in the right order, for each recipe,
if its ingredients are a subset of supplies,
we prepare it and add it to supplies, to be
able to use it for further recipes. Let's
implement all of this. Our function takes
as parameters the list of recipes, the 2D
list of ingredients, and the list of supplies.
But lists might not be the best structure
to work with, let's convert them. We want
to find the ingredients of a recipe by its
name, so we need a hash table, and we want
to check if ingredients are a subset, so it's
better to have lists of ingredients as sets
rather than lists. This is why we convert
the array of arrays of ingredients to a hash
table of string to set. ingredients[i] represents
ingredients of recipes[i], so ingredients
becomes a hash table where for each index
i, the key is the recipe's name, recipes[i],
and the value is the ingredients as a set,
set(ingredients[i]). We also convert supplies
to set, for the .issubset() operations. Now
we start building the graph, for that we need
an adjacency list where the key is recipe's
name and the value is the list of recipes
it's an ingredient to. We initially just create
the keys with empty arrays, then we start
filling edges. Now we fill edges, for each
recipe u, for each recipe v, if u is in ingredients[v],
then u must come before v, we add an edge
from u to v, in other words, we add v to outneighbors
of u. We have the graph, we just call topological_sort()
on it to get the ordering, topological_sort()
is the function we made in previous lecture
when we studied the two algorithms, so we
can either use dfs or bfs. Now that we got
the ordering, we create an array where we
put recipes we will prepare, and we traverse
recipes in that order. For each recipe in
ordering, if its ingredients are a subset
of supplies, then we can prepare it, we add
it to prepared and we also add it to supplies,
because now we can use it in next recipes.
After the loop, we just return prepared, the
array of recipes we've been able to prepare.
At this point you think that you're done with
this problem but you hear that something's
coming, it's an obstacle that comes with topological
sort, it's cycles! Nothing says that there
is no cycles in the problem statement, so
we should think about how to handle cycles.
A cycle in this graph means that some recipes
are dependent to each other, for example to
make a recipe B we need the recipe A as ingredient,
to make A we need C, and to make C we need
B. How to handle this? We must be aware that
recipes involved in a cycle can't be prepared,
they need each other so none of them can be
prepared. But not only, even recipes that
are dependent of recipes involved in a cycle
cannot be prepared. Here is an example. We
have this graph of recipes. We have a cycle
made of recipes D G E and H, we deduce that
they can't be prepared. To prepare I, we need
H, which cannot be prepared, we deduce that
I also cannot be prepared, because we will
never have all of the ingredients. Then for
J, same thing, it needs G and H which cannot
be prepared. L, same thing, it needs I and
I cannot be prepared. And same thing for all
of these recipes. If you remember, in the
last lecture when we were discussing Kahn's
algorithm, when we had a cycle, the process
stopped because the queue became empty, even
if we didn't finish all vertices. But if you
have a look at ordering, it wasn't empty,
we had some vertices that we could finish.
In our problem, vertices that enter ordering
before the process stops represent recipes
we can potentially prepare. So the idea is
that we apply the process normally, and as
soon as it stops, we don't care about remaining
recipes because we know that they can't be
prepared, they're either involved in a cycle
or dependent on a recipe that is involved
in a cycle, so we work with recipes that entered
the ordering only. For example with this graph,
this is what we get. Green vertices are recipes
we can potentially prepare, they didn't get
affected by existence of cycles. To implement
it, in the topological_sort() function, we
just don't return an empty array when we find
a cycle, we return it as it is, because we
need those vertices, even if the ordering
isn't complete. Our solution now handles cycles,
even if we have a cycle, topological_sort()
will return only recipes that can potentially
be prepared. For the time complexity, we put
n as the number of recipes, m as the sum of
number of ingredients of each recipe, and
k as the number of initial supplies. We start
by converting ingredients to a hash table
of sets, which requires us to traverse all
ingredients, the cost is m. Then we convert
supplies to a set, it costs k. Then we create
a graph of n vertices, one for each recipe,
the cost is n. After it, we fill the edges,
the outer loop traverses recipes, n iterations,
the inner loop traverses recipes, n iterations,
and checking if u is in ingredients[v] costs
O(1) in average, because we're working with
sets. So the cost of filling edges is n².
Then, we call topological_sort(), which has
a cost in O(|V|+|E|) as explained in previous
lectures. |V| here is the number of recipes,
n, and |E| is the number of dependencies between
recipes, which cannot exceed m. Last step,
we traverse ordering. Ordering has at most
n elements inside it, the loop does n iterations.
And checking if ingredients[recipe] is a subset
of supplies, has a cost of k, the number of
supplies. As a total cost, we
have T(n,m,k) = m+k+n+n²+n+m+nk, which is
in O(n²+nk+m) time complexity. And for the
space complexity, we have m for ingredients,
k+n for supplies, n+m for the graph, n for
ordering, and n for prepared. supplies and
graph may not be clear, let me explain. supplies
initially has k elements, and in the last
loop we add to it at most n recipes, remember
that when prepare a recipe we add it to supplies,
the total is k+n. And for the graph, an adjacency
list costs |V|+|E| space, here |V| is n and
|E| is at most m. In total we have S(n,m,k)
= 4n+2m+k, which gives a space complexity
of O(n+m+k). We've reached the end of this
practice lecture, I hope that you understood
how we used topological sort to solve this
problem, if you didn't, you can ask me questions.
See you in the next lecture!